While Nathan is 13 years old and is in the Catholic orphanage, his older brother Samuel, who has become a thief, makes him go to the wall to take him secretly to the house of a great archaeologist with belongings belonging to their mother who has was his colleague. Spotted by the old woman who alerts the police, the latter nevertheless recognizes them and agrees to leave them her notes before dying of a heart attack. The two brothers have to flee and understand that they have to change identities; remembering that their mother was persuaded that the legendary explorer Francis Drake had hidden heirs, they decide to adopt his name to start their new lives.

Years later, Nathan and Sam, now adults, infiltrate a Panamanian prison alongside their ally Rafe Adler and are looking for information on pirate Henry Avery 's treasure . They discover that the latter has left a trail for any pirate who wanted to join his community to follow and that the latter leads to a church in Scotland. In their escape, Rafe kills a guard and Sam gets shot. Presumed dead, Nathan decides to drop the case, unlike Rafe.

Three years have passed since his search for the city of Imran in Yemen and Nathan now lives a peaceful and quiet life alongside Elena, having given up his life as a treasure hunter and seems to be happy despite his longing for adventure. That's when Sam reappears, alive and well. After a warm reunion, he explains to his little brother that he was incarcerated for years in the prison before being delivered by Hector Alcazar, drug baron, who demands half of Avery's treasure in exchange. Nathan agrees to help her but chooses to hide it from Elena, afraid she'll think he wants to go back to his old life and leave her again.

Nathan and Sam are joined by Sully and the trio go to an illegal auction at the Rossi estate in Italy. They steal a coin giving coordinates leading to a Scottish church, but discover that Rafe is still on the case and now allied with Nadine Ross, fearsome warrior at the head of Shoreline, a powerful private military company . Traveling to Scotland, they inspect the church and find new coordinates leading to Kings Bay in Madagascar. They also find there the seal of another pirate, Thomas Tew , which makes Nathan think that Avery would have invited other pirates to join him and hide their treasures together.

In the Bay of Kings, they realize that more than a dozen pirate captains have accepted Avery's offer and they find the location of the island of Libertalia , legendary free city of pirates; but Elena discovers the truth and blames Nathan for it. Sully then stays with her while Nathan and Sam travel to the island, and discover that the pirate captains have stolen the gold. However, they are captured by Shorelin. Rafe then reveals to Nathan that Sam lied to him: Hector Alcazar was shot six months before; it was Rafe who freed Sam from prison, but the latter double-crossed him to steal the treasure from him. Angry, Nathan accuses Sam of having put his couple in danger for nothing. Rafe then tries to shoot Nathan, who manages to escape, seriously injured,

Joined by Elena and Sully, Nathan reveals to his wife the truth about his past and all three decide to go save Sam. Along the way, Elena and Nathan reconcile, after the latter understands that Nathan acted out of fear of losing her. She nevertheless asks him not to lie to her anymore and to let her participate as a woman and a partner. They manage to save Sam, who refuses to let go and goes to find Avery's treasure, which he hid in his ship in a cave after stealing it from the other pirates. Nathan pursues him and both face Rafe after Nadine abandons him. Nathan kills Rafe then the two brothers flee the cave buried like the treasure by Avery's explosives.

Returning home Nathan and Elena decide to continue their treasure hunts in a legal, official and framed by law. At the same time, Sam and Sully become partners. Years later, Nathan and Elena have become renowned explorers and have a daughter, Cassie, to whom they decide to reveal their pasts so that she understands who they really are.

Game system 
This game takes up the basics of the three previous opuses by adding a few new features. We thus alternate the calm phases, therefore platforms where you have to climb in order to reach a specific place and in general solve one or more puzzles. The grappling hook is a gameplay element introduced at the start of the game and is often essential throughout the adventure. These calm phases can also be in vehicles always to go to an important place (you can get out of the vehicle at any time to explore the surroundings).

There are in particular phases of chases in cars or on foot (in this kind of moment there are scripts to respect, like jumping from car to car otherwise Nathan Drake dies and you have to start again at the last checkpoint).

The treasures to be found are always present and are represented as luminous white dots, there is often a small annex area that must be reached to find the treasure. They can still be reviewed in the options. They can be retrieved with the triangle button on the controller.

For the fights, it's third person shooting, it is strongly recommended to be as much in cover as possible (the health drops very quickly: as the player takes damage the screen becomes stained with blood then becomes dark gray verging on black announcing near death) and to manage to kill several enemies without being spotted. You can change weapons as you wish, there is always the possibility of recharging ammunition on killed enemies. Nathan Drake can carry a maximum of 2 weapons, a light one like the 9mm pistol and a heavier one like the AK47. Nate can carry up to a maximum of 4 grenades or 4 dynamites.

Like the previous games, Nathan can also fight melee with the square key and to avoid a blow with the triangle key. The novelty of this Uncharted 4 is that you are often accompanied by one or more NPCs , so you can "finish off" an enemy with an allied NPC .

Also new, when you explore the surroundings you can find "journal entries" which make Nate draw the location, object, map or other on his notebook, accessible at any time using the touchpad of the controller. This notebook can be useful for solving certain puzzles in the game